# Basic usage
**Parser generator** is a tool that generates a parser from a given grammar specification. The generated parser can then be used to parse input strings according to the rules defined in the grammar.

Grammax can be used as a parser generator for any context-free grammar. The parsing process is inspired from LALR(1) parsing but with a delicate design to support incremental parsing and error recovery.

The parser generated by Grammax is designed to produce a concrete syntax tree (CST) that represents the lossless structure of the input text. There is no any value conversion, restructuring or simplification during parsing process. The CST is faithful to the input text and grammar rules.

## Create a parser

To create a parser instance, you need to define a grammar and instantiate a `Parser` with the grammar. The parser can then be used to parse input strings according to the rules defined in the grammar.

```rust
let grammar = new_grammar!(
    start where
    start -> r!(expr) + tt(EndOfInput)
    expr -> r!(add) | r!(mul) | r!(primary)
    add  -> r!(expr) + tt("+") + r!(expr).drop(1)
    mul  -> r!(expr).drop(1) + tt("*") + r!(expr).drop(2)
    primary -> tt(NUMBER) | tt("(") + r!(expr) + tt(")")
);
let mut parser = Parser::new(grammar); // create a parser instance with the grammar
```

You can configure the parser with various options packed in `ParserConfig`, such as enabling or disabling error recovery, setting the maximum number of errors to report, etc.

For example, the following code represents a parser configuration which is identical to the default one (`ParserConfig::default()`).

```rust
let my_config = ParserConfig {
    simple_ast: true,
    disable_reuse: false,
    disable_recovery: false,
    recovery: RecoveryConfig {
        nshifts: 3,
        ntry: 250,
        timeout: Duration::from_millis(500),
    }
}
```

- *`simple_ast`*: If false, the parser will produce a more verbose CST with more intermediate nodes. The corresponding rules of the nodes are generated by the grammar compiler and are named with a prefix `@`. It is not recommended to set this option to false because the verbose CST is more difficult to work with and does not provide much benefit in most cases.
- *`disable_reuse`*: If true, the parser will not reuse any existing nodes during incremental parsing. This may lead to worse performance.
- *`disable_recovery`*: If true, the parser will not perform any error recovery and will report the first error it encounters. This may lead to better performance but worse error reporting quality.
- *`recovery`*: This field contains the configuration for error recovery. It is ignored if `disable_recovery` is true. The fields in `RecoveryConfig` are:
    - *`nshifts`*: The maximum number of shifts to perform during error recovery.
    - *`ntry`*: The maximum number of recovery attempts to make before giving up.
    - *`timeout`*: The maximum amount of time to spend on error recovery before giving up.

> The default configuration is a good choice for most cases. You can try tweaking the recovery parameters if you want to improve the error recovery quality or performance.

Continuing the example above, you can set the parser configuration by calling the `set_config` method on the parser instance:

```rust
parser.set_config(my_config);
```

## Use the parser
To parse an input string, you can call the `parse_text` method on the parser instance:

```rust
let result = parser.parse_text("1 + 2 * 3");
```

You can also use `parse` directly with the grammar instance, which can be a shortcut for creating a parser and parsing in one step:

```rust
let result = grammar.parse("1 + 2 * 3");
```

## Parse result

The result of parsing is a `Result` struct that allows you to pretty print error messages and the parse tree. It can also create a [node view](./4-2-tree.md#node-view) or [viewer](./4-2-tree.md#viewer) for the root node of the parse tree, which provides a more convenient API for traversing the parse tree or transforming it into an abstract syntax tree (AST).

You can call `format_messages()` on the parse result to get a human-readable string of the parser messages, which include errors and warnings encountered during parsing. You can also call `format_ast()` to get a visual representation of the parse tree.

```rust
println!("Messages:\n{}", result.format_messages());
println!("Parse tree:\n{}", result.format_ast());
```

## Error messages

**Error messages** are generated during the parsing process to report errors. They contain information about the type of error, the location of the error in the source text, and a human-readable message describing the error. The parser messages are designed to be informative and helpful for debugging the grammar and the input text, and they can be pretty printed using the `format_messages` method on the parse result.

The errors can be categorized into the following types:

Unexpected token
  : This error occurs when the parser encounters a token that does not match any of the expected tokens according to the grammar rules. The message will indicate what token was unexpected and what tokens were expected at that position. It carries a series of expected rule indices, which can be mapped to the corresponding rule names in the grammar for better error reporting. For example,

    ```rust
    let result = parser.parse_text("1 + 2a * 3");
    println!("Messages:\n{}", result.format_messages());

    /* Output:

        error: unexpected token at 1:5
        1 | 1 + 2a * 3
                 ^
        expected: ")", "*", "+" or EOF
    */
    ```

Missing token
  : This error occurs when the parser expects a token at a certain position according to the grammar rules, but it is missing in the input text. The message will indicate what token was expected at that position. Similar to the unexpected token error, it also carries a series of expected rule indices for better error reporting. For example,

    ```rust
    let result = parser.parse_text("1 + 2 * ");
    println!("Messages:\n{}", result.format_messages());

    /* Output:

        error: missing token at 1:7
        1 | 1 + 2 * 
                   ^
        expected: EOF or number
    */
    ```

Internal error
    : This error should never occur during normal parsing process. It indicates that there is a bug in the parser implementation or an unexpected situation that the parser cannot handle. 